Silence fell upon the room where the boy 

and woman sat together. Again, as on the 

other evenings, they were embarrassed. 

After a time the boy tried again to 

talk. ?I suppose it won?t be for a year 

or two but I?ve been thinking about it,? 

he said, rising and going toward the 

door. ?Something father said makes it 

sure that I shall have to go away.? He 

fumbled with the doorknob. In the room 

the silence became unbearable to the 

woman. She wanted to cry out with joy 

because of the words that had come from 

the lips of her son, but the expression 

of joy had become impossible to her. ?I 

think you had better go out among the 

boys. You are too much indoors,? she 

said. ?I thought I would go for a little 

walk,? replied the son stepping 

awkwardly out of the room and closing 

the door. DEPARTURE

Young George Willard got out of bed at 

four in the morning. It was April and 

the young tree leaves were just coming 

out of their buds. The trees along the 

residence streets in Winesburg are maple 

and the seeds are winged. When the wind 

blows they whirl crazily about, filling 

the air and making a carpet underfoot. 

George came downstairs into the hotel 

office carrying a brown leather bag. His 

trunk was packed for departure. Since 

two o?clock he had been awake thinking 

of the journey he was about to take and 

wondering what he would find at the end 

of his journey. The boy who slept in the 

hotel office lay on a cot by the door. 

His mouth was open and he snored 

lustily. George crept past the cot and 

went out into the silent deserted main 

street. The east was pink with the dawn 

and long streaks of light climbed into 

the sky where a few stars still shone. 

Beyond the last house on Trunion Pike in 

Winesburg there is a great stretch of 

open fields. The fields are owned by 

farmers who live in town and drive 

homeward at evening along Trunion Pike 

in light creaking wagons. In the fields 

are planted berries and small fruits. In 

the late afternoon in the hot summers 

when the road and the fields are covered 

with dust, a smoky haze lies over the 

great flat basin of land. To look across 

it is like looking out across the sea. 

In the spring when the land is green the 

effect is somewhat different. The land 

becomes a wide green billiard table on 

which tiny human insects toil up and 

down. 

All through his boyhood and young 

manhood George Willard had been in the 

habit of walking on Trunion Pike. He had 

been in the midst of the great open 

place on winter nights when it was 

covered with snow and only the moon 

looked down at him he had been there in 

the fall when bleak winds blew and on 

summer evenings when the air vibrated 

with the song of insects. On the April 

morning he wanted to go there again, to 

walk again in the silence. He did walk 

to where the road dipped down by a 

little stream two miles from town and 

then turned and walked silently back 

again. When he got to Main Street clerks 

were sweeping the sidewalks before the 

stores. ?Hey, you George. How does it 

feel to be going away?? they asked. 

The westbound train leaves Winesburg at 

seven fortyfive in the morning. Tom 

Little is conductor. His train runs from 

Cleveland to where it connects with a 

great trunk line railroad with terminals 

in Chicago and New York. Tom has what in 

railroad circles is called an ?easy 

run.? Every evening he returns to his 

family. In the fall and spring he spends 

his Sundays fishing in Lake Erie. He has 

a round red face and small blue eyes. He 

knows the people in the towns along his 

railroad better than a city man knows 

the people who live in his apartment 

building. 

George came down the little incline from 

the New Willard House at seven o?clock. 

Tom Willard carried his bag. The son had 

become taller than the father. 

On the station platform everyone shook 

the young man?s hand. More than a dozen 

people waited about. Then they talked of 

their own affairs. Even Will Henderson, 

who was lazy and often slept until nine, 

had got out of bed. George was 

embarrassed. Gertrude Wilmot, a tall 

thin woman of fifty who worked in the 

Winesburg post office, came along the 

station platform. She had never before 

paid any attention to George. Now she 

stopped and put out her hand. In two 

words she voiced what everyone felt. ?

Good luck,? she said sharply and then 

turning went on her way. 

When the train came into the station 

George felt relieved. He scampered 

hurriedly aboard. Helen White came 

running along Main Street hoping to have 

a parting word with him, but he had 

found a seat and did not see her. When 

the train started Tom Little punched his 

ticket, grinned and, although he knew 

George well and knew on what adventure 

he was just setting out, made no 

comment. Tom had seen a thousand George 

Willards go out of their towns to the 

city. It was a commonplace enough 

incident with him. In the smoking car 

there was a man who had just invited Tom 

to go on a fishing trip to Sandusky Bay. 

He wanted to accept the invitation and 

talk over details. 

George glanced up and down the car to be 

sure no one was looking, then took out 

his pocketbook and counted his money. 

His mind was occupied with a desire not 

to appear green. Almost the last words 

his father had said to him concerned the 

matter of his behavior when he got to 

the city. ?Be a sharp one,? Tom Willard 

had said. ?Keep your eyes on your money. 

Be awake. That?s the ticket. Don?t let 

anyone think you?re a greenhorn.? 

After George counted his money he looked 

out of the window and was surprised to 

see that the train was still in 

Winesburg. 

The young man, going out of his town to 

meet the adventure of life, began to 

think but he did not think of anything 

very big or dramatic. Things like his 

mother?s death, his departure from 

Winesburg, the uncertainty of his future 

life in the city, the serious and larger 

aspects of his life did not come into 

his mind. 

He thought of little things?Turk Smollet 

THE BOOK OF THE GROTESQUE


The writer, an old man with a white 

mustache, had some difficulty in getting 

into bed. The windows of the house in 

which he lived were high and he wanted 

to look at the trees when he awoke in 

the morning. A carpenter came to fix the 

bed so that it would be on a level with 

the window. 

Quite a fuss was made about the matter. 

The carpenter, who had been a soldier in 

the Civil War, came into the writer?s 

room and sat down to talk of building a 

platform for the purpose of raising the 

bed. The writer had cigars lying about 

and the carpenter smoked. 

For a time the two men talked of the 

raising of the bed and then they talked 

of other things. The soldier got on the 

subject of the war. The writer, in fact, 

led him to that subject. The carpenter 

had once been a prisoner in 

Andersonville prison and had lost a 

brother. The brother had died of 

starvation, and whenever the carpenter 

got upon that subject he cried. He, like 

the old writer, had a white mustache, 

and when he cried he puckered up his 

lips and the mustache bobbed up and 

down. The weeping old man with the cigar 

in his mouth was ludicrous. The plan the 

writer had for the raising of his bed 

was forgotten and later the carpenter 

did it in his own way and the writer, 

who was past sixty, had to help himself 

with a chair when he went to bed at 

night. 

In his bed the writer rolled over on his 

side and lay quite still. For years he 

had been beset with notions concerning 

his heart. He was a hard smoker and his 

heart fluttered. The idea had got into 

his mind that he would some time die 

unexpectedly and always when he got into 

bed he thought of that. It did not alarm 

him. The effect in fact was quite a 

special thing and not easily explained. 

It made him more alive, there in bed, 

than at any other time. Perfectly still 

he lay and his body was old and not of 

much use any more, but something inside 

him was altogether young. He was like a 

pregnant woman, only that the thing 

inside him was not a baby but a youth. 

No, it wasn?t a youth, it was a woman, 

young, and wearing a coat of mail like a 

knight. It is absurd, you see, to try to 

tell what was inside the old writer as 

he lay on his high bed and listened to 

the fluttering of his heart. The thing 

to get at is what the writer, or the 

young thing within the writer, was 

thinking about. 

The old writer, like all of the people 

in the world, had got, during his long 

fife, a great many notions in his head. 

He had once been quite handsome and a 

number of women had been in love with 

him. And then, of course, he had known 

people, many people, known them in a 

peculiarly intimate way that was 

different from the way in which you and 

I know people. At least that is what the 

writer thought and the thought pleased 

him. Why quarrel with an old man 

concerning his thoughts? 

In the bed the writer had a dream that 

was not a dream. As he grew somewhat 

sleepy but was still conscious, figures 

began to appear before his eyes. He 

imagined the young indescribable thing 

within himself was driving a long 

procession of figures before his eyes. 

You see the interest in all this lies in 

the figures that went before the eyes of 

the writer. They were all grotesques. 

All of the men and women the writer had 

ever known had become grotesques. 

The grotesques were not all horrible. 

Some were amusing, some almost 

beautiful, and one, a woman all drawn 

out of shape, hurt the old man by her 

grotesqueness. When she passed he made a 

noise like a small dog whimpering. Had 

you come into the room you might have 

supposed the old man had unpleasant 

dreams or perhaps indigestion. 
